README for LaTTe
================

LaTTe is a virtual machine designed to execute Java bytecodes (we're
not calling it a Java virtual machine here since it hasn't actually
passed the Java compatibility tests).  It is supposed to be a research
prototype for implementing various optimization techniques.

LaTTe includes a fast and effective JIT compiler, and has a basic
framework for supporting adaptive compilation, which includes a
reasonably fast interpreter.

Since the primary purpose of this machine is the study of better
optimizations for runtime compilers, it is not very complete besides
the translator itself.  It doesn't support JNI nor the AWT library,
for example.

The machine runs only on Solaris 2.5 or higher on UltraSPARCs.  The
GNU C Compiler is required to build it (the versions used for
development were 2.7.2.3.f.1 and 2.95.1, although other versions
higher than 2.7.2 should also work).

For installation instructions, read the file INSTALL.  For licensing
terms, read the file LICENSE.  Also, a user manual written in Texinfo
is available in the doc/ directory.

Bugs not listed in the BUGS file or missing features not listed in the
TODO file should be reported to <latte-bugs@pallas.snu.ac.kr>, or
alternatively with the bug reporting form located at the LaTTe home
page.  Patches to fix these bugs would of course be welcome (as long
as they're correct!).

If you incorporate part or all of LaTTe in some commercial product or
research project, we would appreciate it if you acknowledge Seoul
National University.  (Of course, doing so doesn't absolve you from
having to include all the copyrights, licensing conditions, and
disclaimers as outlined in the license.)

For more information on LaTTe, visit <http://latte.snu.ac.kr/>.
