.\"  latte.1
.\"   
.\"    Manual pages for LaTTe
.\"  
.\"    Written by: SeungIl Lee <hacker@altair.snu.ac.kr>
.\"  
.\"    Copyright (C) 1999 MASS Lab., Seoul, Korea.
.\"  
.\"    See the file LICENSE for usage and redistribution terms and a
.\"    disclaimer of all warranties. */
.TH latte 1 "August 1999" "LaTTe Java Virtual Machine" "Unix manuals"
.SH NAME
latte \- a virtual machine which can execute Java bytecode
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "latte"
.B "[\-help]"
.B "[\-version]"
.B "[\-ss \fIsize\fB]"
.B "[\-mx \fIsize\fB]"
.B "[\-ms \fIsize\fB]"
.B "[\-classpath \fIpath\fB]"
.B "[\-D\fIproperty\fB=\fIvalue\fB]"
.B "[\-verbosegc]"
.B "[\-verboseloader]"
.B "[\-verbosejit]"
.B "[\-verbosetime]"
.B "[\-vtm]"
.B "[\-vcm]"
.B "[\-vtime]"
.B "[\-vvcg]"
.B "[\-vasm]"
.B "[\-vexception]"
.B "[\-vtrstats]"
.B "[\-nocse]"
.B "[\-noloopopt]"
.B "[\-nocustom]"
.B "[\-noinlining]"
.B "[\-adapt]"
.B "[\-count \fIc\fB]"
.B "[\-nointrp]"
.I "class"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B LaTTe
executes Java classes.  It uses a just-in-time (JIT) compiler to
translate Java bytecode to native code on the fly.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-help"
Print terse explanations for each runtime option.
.TP
.B "\-version"
Print version number.
.TP
.B "\-ss \fIsize\fB"
Set the maximum native stack size to \fIsize\fR.
.TP
.B "\-mx \fIsize\fB"
Set the maximum heap size to \fI size\fR.  This does not include the
memory used by the translator.
.TP
.B "\-ms \fIsize\fB"
Set the initial heap size to \fI size\fR.
.TP
.B "\-classpath \fIpath\fB"
Set the class path to \fIpath\fR, which is a colon-separated list of
locations to search for classes.
.TP
.B "\-D\fIproperty\fB=\fIvalue\fB"
Set \fIproperty\fR to \fIvalue\fR.
.TP
.B "\-verbosegc"
Print garbage collection statistics to standard error.
.TP
.B "\-verboseloader"
Print message when loading classes.
.TP
.B "\-verbosejit"
Print message during JIT code generation.
.TP
.B "\-verbosetime"
Print garbage collection and translation time.
.TP
.B "\-vtm"
Print translated methods.
.TP
.B "\-vcm"
Print called methods.
.TP
.B "\-vvcg"
Print a 
.I vcg 
file for each method.
.TP
.B "\-vexception"
Print the exceptions that are generated.
.TP
.B "\-vtrstats"
Print translation statistics.
.TP
.B "\-Obase"
Translate methods with no optimizations.
.TP
.B "\-Oopt"
Translate methods with optimizations.
.TP
.B "\-Oadapt"
Adaptively retranslate methods based on method run counts.  All
optimizations are used when retranslating.
.TP
.B "\-adapt"
Adaptively retranslate methods based on method run counts.
.TP
.B "\-count \fIc\fB"
Retranslate after method runs 
.I c 
times.  Only useful when method run count based retranslation is
turned on.
.TP
.B "\-nointrp"
Don't use interpreter for the initial execution of methods.  Only
available when interpreter is included.
.TP
.B "\-nocse"
Do not do commom subexpression elimination.
.TP
.B "\-noloopopt"
Do not do loop invariant code motion.
.TP
.B "\-nocustom"
Do not do customization of methods based on receiving object types.
.TP
.B "\-nospecial"
Do not do specialization of methods based on argument types.
.TP
.B "\-noinlining"
Do not do any method inlining.

.SH NOTE
Java is a registered trademark of Sun Microsystems, Inc.

LaTTe is available from the web site at
.RI <http://latte.snu.ac.kr/>

There is also a mailing list for LaTTe:
.TP
.I latte@pallas.snu.ac.kr
General discussions about LaTTe
.LP

To subscribe to this list, send a message containing the word
"subscribe" to
.IR latte\-request@pallas.snu.ac.kr

.SH BUGS
Refer to the TODO list included in the source distribution.

.SH AUTHORS
The following has done major work on the LaTTe virtual machine.

Byung-Sun Yang 

Seongbae Park 

SeungIl Lee 

Junpyo Lee

Jinpyo Park

Suhyun Kim

Yoo C. Chung
